## Interesting Philosophical Topics

---

* [The Nature of "Politics"](philosophical-topics#the-nature-of-politics)
* [Descriptive vs. Prescriptive Statements](philosophical-topics#descriptive-vs-prescriptive-statements)
* [*A Priori* vs. *A Posteriori* Justifications](philosophical-topics#a-priori-vs-a-posteriori-justifications)
* [Epistemic Injustice](philosophical-topics#epistemic-injustice)
* [Adaptive Preferences](philosophical-topics#adaptive-preferences)

---

### The Nature of “Politics”

*This section is inspired by and draws from Martha Nussbaum’s book "Creating Capabilities". Any quotes which are followed by (page \_\_\_) are taken from that page of the first edition of said book.*

In recent times, the use of the word "politics" has become muddled. When faced with an ongoing protest, some people will complain about discussions getting "too political" or state that they’re just "not interested in politics". In response, some people might say something like "human rights shouldn’t be a political issue." All of these people are using the word "political" like the word "partisan". Yet politics is a much deeper topic than red vs. blue: politics originated as the discussion of how we should organize society to make sure that as many people as possible have the chance to achieve *eudaimonia*, an Aristotlean term for “a flourishing life” that could also be translated as “prosperity”. 

Indeed, the word “politics” comes from the word *politeia*, a word which roughly translates to “constitution”. To Aristotle, “constitution” literally meant “an ordering of the inhabitants of a society” ([source](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/aristotle-politics/#PolView)). Aristotle believed that there was some telos (ultimate goal) which all society reaches towards: eudaimonia. We might disagree on what eudaimonia is, but most of us would agree it cannot be forced upon someone: a person could be given every material object they could ever ask for and still be deeply unsatisfied. Perhaps even more importantly, Aristotle explicitly stated that satisfaction without choice was unworthy of the dignity of humans. The role of the government, then, is not to prescribe eudaimonia, but to try to create the best conditions to allow people the opportunity to flourish. 

Aristotle believed that humans were vulnerable: he decided the government must address issues such as “the purity of the water supply and the quality of air, as well as education” (page 127). The Roman Stoics held a different opinion: they believed that “all humans, just by virtue of being human, had dignity”  (page 129). However, they went further, holding that material conditions were utterly unimportant; for example, they believed that slaves should be respected, but did not denounce the institution of slavery. Of course, Aristotle had his issues too. He also saw no problem with slavery and believed that women, immigrants, manual laborers, farmers, and sailors did not deserve citizenship. Despite the flaws in these ideologies, modern work on human rights (and the related notion of “capabilities”) is built on a synthesis of these two ideas: that all humans have dignity, but that this inherent dignity can be infringed by severely undesirable external conditions. In particular, almost every modern political philosophy agrees that the structure of society must in some way provide desirable external conditions. 

The influences of these political ideas (and many like them) continue to this day. For example, the Stoics believed that "we should treat the artificial distinctions created by society as trivial and insignificant" (page 129), an opinion that is mirrored by modern-day neoliberals when they reject the notion that the government should correct for unequal external conditions for different races, genders, or classes. To create a coherent political framework, we must begin with a philosophical idea of what the ultimate goals of society, and the government or institutions that organize it, are. Only once we agree on where we are going can we begin to discuss how we will get there. 

### Descriptive vs. Prescriptive Statements

In epistemology, there is a famous problem put forth by David Hume called the “is-ought problem” (also known as "Hume’s guillotine"). In short, Hume noticed that people were deriving statements about what *ought to be* (called "prescriptive" or "normative" statements) solely from statements about what *is* (called "descriptive" or "positive" statements), and he challenged the idea that this is ever logically valid. To see why, take the following argument as an example: 

Premise 1: It is cold outside. 
Premise 2: All people who go outside when it is cold without a coat are cold. 
Conclusion: You should wear a coat to go outside. 

Despite the fact that this is solid everyday advice, it is not a logically valid argument. There is a missing premise: the premise that “you should not be cold”. As you can see, for our conclusion to be an “ought” statement, we need at least one of our premises to also be an “ought” statement. The is-ought problem says that we could never derive an "ought" statement from solely statements about what is, and to this day, the problem still stands. 

### *A Priori* vs. *A Posteriori* Justifications

An *a priori* justification is a justification that is based not on empirical evidence and observation, but on theoretical deduction ([source](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/apriori/)). Formally, an a priori justification is one that follows from definitions. On the other hand, an *a posteriori* justification is one that is based on empirical evidence and observation — essentially, it follows from (either collective or individual) experience. "Hume's fork" is the idea that all genuine propositions are either a priori or a posteriori justifications ([source](https://www.jstor.org/stable/27743990)). Practically, this means that any proposition you make must either be justified by empirical evidence or follow from the definitions you adopt. 

Understanding this topic is especially important today, because many people choose to reject empirical evidence in political discussions. If they choose to lean into valid a priori arguments, this is at least a good-faith stance (even if it can be counterproductive). However, some people (such as Nick Fuentes [here](https://youtu.be/8XbT4UojaRw?t=1370)) will claim that their (unjustified) points are "true a priori" because they are "common sense". Such a claim, even dressed up in terminology, is ridiculous; understanding the terminology will help you notice when people fail to properly justify their propositions. 

### Epistemic Injustice

Epistemic injustice is a term introduced by Miranda Fricker in her book of the same name ([source](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/josp.12348)). At its core, epistemic injustice means that someone is being wronged as a knower, that they have been discriminated against in their means of receiving or sharing knowledge. This name comes from epistemology, the branch of philosophy associated with the study of knowledge and the truth. Fricker identified two types of epistemic injustice: 

1. *Testimonial injustice* is when people are given more or less credibility as a knower based on their audience's prejudices. Fricker specifically refers to Duwayne Brooks, who saw his friend murdered but could not convince the police who arrived at his call to trust him and go after the assailants (on account of his race). Another example is our tendency to prioritize the written word over oral tradition, despite the intricate and beautiful history behind the latter ([source](https://ir.uiowa.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1186&context=bai)).
2. Over time, testimonial injustices can lead to *hermeneutical injustice*. Hermeneutical injustice occurs when a collective group's experiences aren’t understood because those experiences don’t fit the norm or have been discredited. In a very real sense, there is often no language to describe this group's lived experience. This leads to issues where people are not able to describe their struggles to those outside the group, but it can also happen internally, preventing people from understanding their own situation simply because nobody has ever studied or reported on their experience. This is only counteracted when these groups create the language required to study their experience, such as the term *misogynoir* for female black writers or the numerous terms created by feminist philosophers in their study of the socially constructed nature of gender.

Related is the stifling of non-Western history that can break down people’s connection to their own cultures over generations. For example, Americans (in particular, African-Americans) are often presented with an idea of Africa as entirely uncivilized and brutish, a depiction which ignores the great achievements of the region. Many of the greatest people in history are from pre-colonial African civilizations. One example is Mansa Musa, a king of Mali in the 1300s, who controlled approximately half of the entire world's supply of gold and is commonly described as the richest person to ever live ([source](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-47379458)). Mansa Musa was also a patron of the arts who created a university with 25,000 students and one of the largest libraries in the world ([source](https://www.historyrevealed.com/eras/medieval/the-richest-man-in-history-mansa-musa-i-of-mali/)). By erasing the achievements of Africa, we isolate African-Americans from learning about a heritage they might deeply care about.

The philosophical concept of epistemic injustice is of critical importance for our project, which centers around spreading knowledge. We must be aware of how epistemic injustice affects our work: the obscuring of knowledge does not happen randomly, but along lines of privilege and disadvantage. 

### Adaptive Preferences

Many political philosophies, such as classical liberalism, social libertarianism, and right-libertarian, value individual freedom above almost anything else. A common phrase associated with these ideologies is “my rights end where yours begin”; they are based on the idea that you should be free to do anything that isn't an act of force against someone else. These political ideologies — and similar moral philosophies, like preference utilitarianism — rely on a Stoic-esque belief in the agency of humans. 

But do people have agency? Throughout history, cultures have forced people into a narrow set of options for how to live their life, often on account of gender, race, or other aspects of people's identity. Sometimes, physical force is used, but more common are more subtle tactics such as stigma and prejudice. Yet many of these people who did not truly have the right to self-determination were fine with their situation — even resistant to changes that empower them. Many brave women fought for the right to vote... but many women fought against it (see [here](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/why-some-women-campaigned-against-vote-women-180961738/)). Today, we see the denial of women’s right to vote as a relic of prejudice but many 19th and early 20th century women didn’t see it that way. 

Modern day political philosophers, such as Amartya Sen and Martha Nussbaum, use the idea of “adaptive preferences” to describe this phenomenon. As discussed in a [2008 HDCA journal entry](https://hd-ca.org/?s2member_file_download_key=3026185d84b1eda8a2525ea012dc9a35&s2member_file_download=/HDCA+2008+-+Watts%2C+Comim+%26+Ridley+-+Adaptive+preferences+and.doc), adaptive preferences concern “self-denial and the individual’s renunciation of her aspirations for a better life” — in one word, “self-abnegation”. When people believe they do not deserve essential rights or capabilities, when people believe that it is good that certain paths of life are denied to them, then they are experiencing "adaptive preferences". 

On the other hand, how can we tell people what they *should* want? We must be sure to avoid reducing the issue to saying that those preferences that align with what we think people should want are “normal”, and those that don’t align with our notions are "adapted" (and thus "abnormal"). This is a difficult-to-reconcile issue, and it follows with any type of universalism. Yet pointing out adaptive preferences where they arise is necessary for truly securing agency for all humans. Without an idea of adaptive preferences, people are slaves to society’s expectations for them, and true freedom — the kind valued by all kinds of modern-day political philosophies — can never be achieved. 
